# Introduction to Web-based Data Visualization

View the live demo here: https://meguna.github.io/demo-web-vis/

## Set up guide 

If you have never done web programming before, there will be a bit of set up involved with getting your development environment ready. I've put together two guides, one for Mac, one for all platforms. I haven't 

1. Install Node.js (v14+)
2. Install Git https://github.com/git-guides/install-git
3. Clone this repository. Run `npm i` inside the repo's root directory. 
4. Run the app with `npm run start`. This is called your development server. This should open a window in your broswer at `localhost:3000` (or some other port). You can keep this window open while you're writing code, and when you save changes to your React app, it should reload automatically and display your changes. 
5. Install an IDE (Integrated Development Environment). This is where you will write your code. My recommendation is VS Code

## Set up guide: Windows

1. Install VS Code: https://code.visualstudio.com/download
2. Install NodeJS and NPM. Node is a Javascript based server engine and is what will be used to power all of our web development work. Thankfully, getting Node to work on a Windows machine should be fairly straightforward. Navigate to the [Node homepage](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) and use the Windows Installer. Please confirm that Node is running on your machine by running `node -v` in your command line of choice (Powershell is fine) and confirming that you get some number like `v16.14.0`. 
3. If you used the Windows installer above, you should also have NPM installed automatically for you. Please check this by running `npm -v` and confirming you get a number like `8.3.1`. NPM stands for "Node Package Manager" and it will manage all of the Javascript code libraries that we will use for this project. 
> If the Installer doesn't work for some reason, you can also manually install Node. To do this, download the "Windows Binary" listed on the Node homepage linked above, and unzip the file. You should get a folder named something like `node-v16.14.0-win-x64` after you unzip. Then, create a folder called `nodejs-lts` in your `%userprofile%/Applications` directory. Place all of the contents of the unzipped folder into the `nodejs-lts` folder. Then, find the setting called `Edit environment variables for your account` (you can just search for this in your start menu) and add a new environment variable called `PATH` (all caps) with the contents `%userprofile%/Applications/nodejs-lts`. Then, restart your command line (you can just close Powershell and open it again). Node and NPM should now be installed. Please run the checks for both as described above.

## Run the Project

1. Download a copy of this project by clicking on the "Code" button on this page and then "Download ZIP." (If you use git, you can also do `git clone git@github.com:meguna/demo-web-vis.git`).
2. Unzip the archive.
3. Open a command line, and navigate to the the folder using `cd`. For example, this might look like `cd /Users/meguna/Downloads/demo-web-vis-master` on a Mac, and `cd C:\Users\mokawa01\Downloads\demo-web-vis-master` on a PC.
4. Then, run `npm i` to install the dependencies for this project.
5. Finally, run `npm run start` to open the project in a web browser. It might take a minute or so, and once it's done initializing, the command should automatically open a browser window at `localhost:3000`. If you get a message like below in your command line, you've successfully launched the project!

```
Compiled successfully!

You can now view deck in the browser.

  Local:            http://localhost:3000/demo-web-vis
  On Your Network:  http://10.245.71.45:3000/demo-web-vis

Note that the development build is not optimized.
To create a production build, use npm run build.
```

## File Directory Guide

This project is set up as a simple single-page [React](https://reactjs.org/) application. 

* The `src` folder is where your React app resides. 
* The first file you should look at is `src/App.js`. This is where the bulk of your website will reside (unless you move them into separate components and import them into App.js instead). In other words, anything you want to display on your website needs to be referenced or imported into `App.js`'s `return` function one way or another.
* The `public` folder is where you will place any `.html` files generated by Kepler. It also includes the entry point file `index.html`.

## Development Guide

### Adding Interactive Maps

There are two ways to add interactive maps to this website. The first is using Kepler. The second method, which you should only use if you want to customize your map significantly, is by using the Deck.gl and Mapbox integration for React. Note that this method requires you to fluidly write a lot of React code!

#### Kepler Web (Recommended)

1. In [Kepler](https://kepler.gl/demo), export the map using the "Share" button at top left, then select "Export Map." Export your map with the "HTML" option.
2. Put the downloaded html file in the `/public` folder of your project, and rename it to something clear and identifiable. 
3. Import your map in `App.js` by copying this code, remembering to replace `your-map-name` with the name of the map you chose in Step 2:
```
<div className="map-wrapper">
  <iframe src={`${process.env.PUBLIC_URL}/<your-map-name>.html`} title="map" sandbox="allow-scripts"/>
</div>
```
This should load the map into your web site.

#### Using React map integrations
We'll use an example component to demonstrate how this works

1. First, import the example component into `App.js` like so: 
```
import Map from './MapExample';
```
2. Then, use this map in your App component by inserting `<Map />` somewhere inside `<div classname="app"></div>` (for example, line 10).
3. If you run `npm start` now, you'll notice that the map isn't being loaded. This is because you need to provide it a Mapbox access token. Make a new file called `.env` inside the root directory, and put this in its contents:
```
REACT_APP_MAPBOX_ACCESS_TOKEN=<your-mapbox-access-token>
```
Make sure to replace `<your-mapbox-access-token>` with your token, which should be something like `pk.xxxxxxxxx....` 
4. Now, restart your development server (CTRL+C in the window that's running `npm start`, then run `npm start` again). You should be able to see the map.
5. You can customize the Map provided in `MapExample.jsx` to fit your needs. The [deck.gl docs](https://deck.gl/docs) are a good place to start. Similarly to how things have already been set up, place any data files you need in the `src/data` directory, and import them into your component. 

### Adding Charts

This project uses [react-chart-js-2](https://github.com/reactchartjs/react-chartjs-2) as its primary charting library. Feel free to use other Javascript-based libraries (such as Plotly JS) if there are others you feel more comfortable with.

There are two chart examples, which you can view in `ScatterplotExample.jsx` and `LinechartExample.jsx`.

In general, here is how you use any chart from React Chart JS:

1. Import ChartJS and import the specific chart component you want to use, like so:
```
// eslint-disable-next-line no-unused-vars
import { Chart as ChartJS } from 'chart.js/auto';
import { Line } from 'react-chartjs-2';
```
In the example above, we want to use a Line chart, so we import the `Line` component. Here are the other types of chart components available: https://react-chartjs-2.netlify.app/components
2. Set up a `data` object. For a simple mapping of numerical values and their 1-to-1 labels, this might look something like this:
```
  const data = {
    labels: <your-labels>,
    datasets: [{
      label: 'My example dataset',
      data: <your-data>,
    }]
  };
```
The various ways you can initialize your `data` parameter is explained here: https://www.chartjs.org/docs/3.3.2/general/data-structures.html

3. If you want to specify other details, set up a `options` object. This is also where you'd customize axes, scales, legends, tooltips, etc beyond their default configuration. More information is listed here: https://www.chartjs.org/docs/3.3.2/general/options.html and for an example on scale customization, look at `ScatterplotExample.jsx`
4. Finally, in the render function of your component, add your chart, which should look something like this:
```
<Scatter options={options} data={data} />
```
Where you would replace `Scatter` with whatever chart you chose in step 1. 

### Adding Sections and Styling

The structure of your website is dictated by how you order and structure elements in the return function of `App.js`. The appearance of your website is dictated by what you put in `.css` files. 

You can come up with your own layouts, but some simple ones have been set up for you:

* To group together headings, charts, paragraphs in a "section" (that puts a big gap between itself and the next section), wrap all of the elements in a `<div>` tag and give that div the class `section`, like so:
```
<div className="section>
<h1>some title</h1>
<iframe ... />
<p>some paragraph</p>
</div>
```
* To stack two things horizontally (so that some element goes on the left side, with 50% of the width, and some other element goes on the right side, with 50% of the width), wrap everything in a `div` with the class `side-by-side` and wrap the two inner elements in a `div` with the class `panel`. You can see an example of this in the last section of `App.js`:
```
<div className="side-by-side">
  <div className="panel">
    <h2>Check this out</h2>
    <p>some paragraph</p>
  </div>
  <div className="panel">
    <Scatterplot />
  </div>
</div>
```

### Appendix: Publishing Code

Since this project for UEP238 uses datasets covered by an NDA, you shouldn't be uploading or open-sourcing this code. However, there may come a time where you want to use this repository as a starting point for a different project, and end up wanting to release/publish/upload this code. In that case, here are a few notes to consider:

- The HTML files exported by Kepler use a Mapbox token, as described above in the "Using React map integrations" section. This token is plainly embedded into the HTML file, and for security purposes shouldn't be uploaded. Follow the instructions in that section, create a .env file, and reference the variable like so: `<title>%REACT_APP_WEBSITE_NAME%</title>`. More details here: https://create-react-app.dev/docs/adding-custom-environment-variables/#referencing-environment-variables-in-the-html